Since most of the sensors are analog so we need to know how to calibrate the sensors with the MCU (Micro-Controller Unit) like Arduino / ESP32 / RasberiPI / STM32. First we neeed to know the operating voltage of the ADC input pin of the MCU like for arduino its 5 Volts for ESP its 3.3 Volts. Sometimes using a multimeter or DSO is better. I this case I was using a ESP32 Devkit V4 and the ADC value maximum was getting upto 3.29 Volts. The ADC quantizes the sensor voltage level into individual bits depending on the resolution. Say if the MCU is arduino, ADC pin operates at 0 Volts minimum and 5 Volts maximum. The ADC is a 10 Bit ADC so it will output 2^10 or 1024 digital values (0 - 1024). The mapping will be done like this ( 0 Volts - 0 ADC value - 0% output & 5 Volts - 1024 ADC Value - 100% output ). If you change the MCU this mapping changes as well. For ESP 32 running at 3.3 Volts with 12 bit ADC will be mapped like ( 0 Volts - 0 ADC value - 0% output & 3.3 Volts - 4095 ADC Value - 100% output ).

For more accurcy I recomend use a multimeter to measure the maximum operating voltage of the ADC of your MCU. Like my ESP32 output was 3.29 Volts instead of 3.3. So I have to map like this ( 0 Volts - 0 ADC value - 0% output & 3.29 Volts - 4095 ADC Value - 100% output ). Every analog sensor outputs in milivolts. It also has a zero point i.e. when the sensor is placed in a specific enviornmental condition, the output of the sensor is absolute 0 mili volts. If sensors are directly connected to the ADC module then most of the information will be lost. Say a sensor outputs 0 to 3 milivolts. If we use a MCU with 12 Bit ADC operating at 3.3 Volts then each ADC value will correspond to 0.805 milivolts. The maximum output of the sensor will be around 4 ADC value. So from 4 ADC value to 4095 ADC value will remian un used. Moreover we would also loose the internal accuracy of the sensor. Sensors needs to be connected to low noise amplifier module to properly amplify the signal to readable voltage range without introducing much noise. Say 0 milivolts to 1 milivolts is properly amplified so that the output is 0 Volts to 3.3 Volts. Then the maximum output of the sensor will be at maximum value of the ADC. In other words we properly perform amplitude scaling on the signal so that the ADC can properly assign the bit values to very minute change in the signal. Increasing the ADC bit also imporves the accuracy.

Sensors used for stable application like water quality detection requires stabalization algorithm. These algorithm takes SCOUNT number of ADC values and avegrage them before converting into the voltage reading. We can also modifyt the SCOUNT based on out requirement. This modifies the sensitivity of the system. For biomedical application this algorithm is not used as we need highly sensitive system taht detects even small micro change in the biology. But for normal appications reducing the sensitivity gives us a smooth curve.
